.TH FENSTERCHEF 1 "2025-04-03" "Fensterchef developer" "Fensterchef manual"
.SH NAME
fensterchef - tiling done the right way
.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B fensterchef
.RI [ OPTION... ]
.
.SH OPTIONS
.PP
.BR -h ,
.BR --help ,
.B --usage
    Show help.
.PP
.BR -v ,
.B --version
    Print the version.
.PP
.B -d
.IR all | info | error | nothing
.BR ( default:
.IB info )
    Set the output logging verbosity.
.PP
.B --verbose
    Log everything.
.PP
.B --config
.I FILE
.BR ( default:
.B ~/.config/fensterchef/fensterchef.config)
    Load
.I FILE
as configuration file.
.PP
.BR -e ,
.B --command
.I COMMAND
    Run a command within fensterchef.
    The command is a list of actions separated by a semicolon (;).
.
.SH DESCRIPTION
The
.B fensterchef
developers thank you for choosing
.BR fensterchef .
.B fensterchef
is an X11 tiling window manager with floating window support and
a keyboard-centric philosophy although there are also a lot of options for the
mouse.

If you have used
.BR ratpoison (1)
before, than this is a perfect replacement for you as
it is heavily inspired by ratpoison's manual tiling.
.BR i3 (1)
users will also have a
smooth transition as floating windows behave essentially the same way, but there
might be some initial confusing about the tiling.

We took the best out of window managers we like to give a new and unique way to
manage windows.
.
.SH TERMINOLOGY
.SS Monitor
A monitor is a sub region of the screen, this would be your output devices.
.SS Window
A window is what you would expect: A rectangular region on the screen displaying
a bar, desktop icons, your browser, a terminal and so on.

The "current window" refers to the window that is currently in focus.
.SS Frame
A frame is also a rectangular region on the screen.
It is the core of the tiling.
Each monitor has a root frame that can be split into as many frames as you like.
A frame may be empty or hold onto a window.

The "current frame" refers to the frame that is selected.
This may also be a group of frames in case you moved to a parent frame.
.SS Stash
The stash is a stack that holds onto frames in the background.
Whenever you remove a frame from the screen, the frame is put into the stash.
When splitting a frame (and having
.B auto-fill-void
configure set to true) frames are popped from the stash.
.SS Window list
The window list can be opened with
.BR Super + W
by default and is
.I the
way to show hidden windows.
There are other ways to show hidden windows through assignments, see
.BR fensterchef (5).

When the window list is open, use the arrow keys or home row keys to navigate
through the windows, then press
.B Return
to show the selected window.
Use
.B Escape
or
.B q
to quit the window list.
.PP
Specific ascii characters are shown to indicate what the window is up to.
It can be a one of these:
.PP
.B *
the window is focused
.PP
.B +
the window is a visible tiling window
.PP
.B -
the window is hidden
.PP
.B =
the window is a visible floating window
.PP
.B F
the window is a visible fullscreen window
.PP
Only windows that can receive focus are shown in the window list.
.
.SH BINDINGS
.PP
Use the the modifier key (default is
.B Mod4
which is usually
.BR Super_L )
together with any binding.
.PP
.B LeftButton
    Start moving/resizing the pressed window, this figures out dynamically which
    edge to move.
.PP
.B MiddleButton
    Minimize (hide) the pressed window.        
.PP
.B RightButton
    Start moving the pressed window.
.PP
.B Shift
+
.B R
    Reload the configuration file and parts of fensterchef.
.PP
.B A
    Focus the parent frame.
.PP
.B B
    Focus the child frame.
.PP
.B Shift
+
.B A
    Focus the root frame.
.PP
.B Q
    Close the current window.
.PP
.B - (minus)
    Minimize (hide) the current window.
.PP
.B N
    Put the next window into the current frame.
.PP
.B P
    Put the previous window into the current frame.
.PP
.B R
    Remove the current frame.
.PP
.B O
    Replace the current frame with the last stashed frame.
.PP
.B Space
    Move the focus from tiling to floating and vise versa.
.PP
.B Shift
+
.B Space
    Make a tiling window floating and vise versa.
.PP
.B F
    Put the current window into fullscreen or put it out of fullscreen.
.PP
.B V
    Split the current frame horizontally.
.PP
.B S
    Split the current frame vertically.
.PP
.B K
    Move the focus to the frame above the current frame.
.PP
.B H
    Move the focus to the frame on the left of the current frame.
.PP
.B L
    Move the focus to the frame on the right of the current frame.
.PP
.B J
    Move the focus to the frame below the current frame.
.PP
.B Shift
+
.B K
    Swap the current frame with the frame above it.
.PP
.B Shift
+
.B H
    Swap the current frame with the frame on the left of it.
.PP
.B Shift
+
.B L
    Swap the current frame with the frame on the right of it.
.PP
.B Shift
+
.B J
    Swap the current frame with the frame below it.
.PP
.B Left
    Move the current window to the left.
.PP
.B Up
    Move the current window up.
.PP
.B Right
    Move the current window to the right.
.PP
.B Down
    Move the current window down.
.PP
.B Shift
+
.B Left
    Decrease the size of the current window's left edge.
.PP
.B Shift
+
.B Up
    Decrease the size of the current window's top edge.
.PP
.B Shift
+
.B Right
    Increase the size of the current window's left edge.
.PP
.B Shift
+
.B Down
    Increase the size of the current window's top edge.
.PP
.B Control
+
.B Left
    Decrease the size of the current window's right edge.
.PP
.B Control
+
.B Up
    Decrease the size of the current window's bottom edge.
.PP
.B Control
+
.B Right
    Increase the size of the current window's right edge.
.PP
.B Control
+
.B Down
    Increase the size of the current window's bottom edge.
.PP
.B Control
+
.B + (plus)
    Inflate the current window.
.PP
.B Control
+
.B = (equal)
    Deflate the current window.
.PP
.B W
    Show the interactive window list.
.PP
.B Return
    Open a terminal window.
.PP
.B Control
+
.B Shift
+
.B E
    Quit fensterchef.
.
.SH EXIT STATUS
If the user quits, the exit status is
.BR 0 .
Otherwise it is
.BR 1 .
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR fensterchef (5)
