.TH FENSTERCHEF 5 "2025-03-17" "Fensterchef developer" "Fensterchef manual"
.SH NAME
fensterchef - format of fensterchef configuration files
.
.SH DESCRIPTION
The fensterchef configuration file format is very simple and easy to understand.

The language is case insensitive (strings however can have mixed case) and it
supports no dynamic features like setting variables.
 
There are sections indicated by
.BI [ section-name ]
and within these sections are the settings the section accepts.
A section may also accept special settings, for example the
.B [keybind]
or
.B [startup]
section.
By default the
.B [startup]
section is used.
This can be imagined like a
.B [startup]
being at the first line.
.
.SH DATA TYPE
A handful of data types are supported.
.SS boolean
A value that is either true or false.
Examples:
    true
    0
    on
.PP
Possible values are:
.BR on ,
.BR yes ,
.B true
.BR off ,
.BR no ,
.BR false .
.SS string
A utf8 encoded sequence of bytes. Characters can be escaped using
.BR \[rs] .
Examples:
    I am not quoted and can not be quoted
    \[rs] I have a leading and trailing space\[rs] 
.SS integer
An integer in base 10 notation with an optional sign.
Integers are limited to 1000000.
Examples:
    -11
    384
    123454678910
.RI ( 1000000 )
.SS quad
A set of 1, 2 or 4 integers.
Examples:
    1 2 3 4
    -4 4 (expands to -4 4 -4 4)
    2 (expands to 2 2 2 2)
.SS color
A color in RRGGBB format.
Examples:
    #ff00ff
    #edceef
    #000000
.SS modifiers
A series of keyboard modifiers.
Examples:
    Shift
    Control + Shift
    Mod1+Mod4
.PP
The possible modifiers are:
.BR Shift ,
.BR Lock ,
.BR CapsLock ,
.BR Ctrl ,
.BR Control ,
.BR Alt ,
.BR Super ,
.BR Mod1 ,
.BR Mod2 ,
.BR Mod3 ,
.BR Mod4 ,
.BR Mod5 .
.SS cursor
A cursor constant.
Examples:
    left-ptr
    fleur
    sizing
.PP
This is a complete list of the possible cursors:
    X-cursor
    arrow
    based-arrow-down
    based-arrow-up
    boat
    bogosity
    bottom-left-corner
    bottom-right-corner
    bottom-side
    bottom-tee
    box-spiral
    center-ptr
    circle
    clock
    coffee-mug
    cross
    cross-reverse
    crosshair
    diamond-cross
    dot
    dotbox
    double-arrow
    draft-large
    draft-small
    draped-box
    exchange
    fleur
    gobbler
    gumby
    hand1
    hand2
    heart
    icon
    iron-cross
    left-ptr
    left-side
    left-tee
    leftbutton
    ll-angle
    lr-angle
    man
    middlebutton
    mouse
    pencil
    pirate
    plus
    question-arrow
    right-ptr
    right-side
    right-tee
    rightbutton
    rtl-logo
    sailboat
    sb-down-arrow
    sb-h-double-arrow
    sb-left-arrow
    sb-right-arrow
    sb-up-arrow
    sb-v-double-arrow
    shuttle
    sizing
    spider
    spraycan
    star
    target
    tcross
    top-left-arrow
    top-left-corner
    top-right-corner
    top-side
    top-tee
    trek
    ul-angle
    umbrella
    ur-angle
    watch
    xterm
.
.SH SECTION
.SS [startup]
This section is equipped by default.
It holds a list of actions, either separated by a new line or a semicolon.
Nothing else can be put into this section.
.SS [general]
This section contains a few miscallaneous options.
.PP
overlap-percentage
.I integer
(default: 80)
.PP
root-cursor
.I cursor
(default: left-ptr)
.PP
moving-cursor
.I cursor
(default: fleur)
.PP
horizontal-cursor
.I cursor
(default: sb-h-double-arrow)
.PP
vertical-cursor
.I cursor
(default: sb-v-double-arrow)
.PP
sizing-cursor
.I cursor
(default: sizing)
.SS [assignment]
Here assignments can be written in the format
.I integer
.I string
.I ;
.I string
.I ;
.IR actions .
The actions are executed when the window gets assigned its number.
If you supply actions, this will overwrite the default behaviour of showing and
focusing the window.
The
.I ;
.I actions
may be omitted.
.PP
first-window-number
.I integer
(default: 1)
.SS [tiling]
Control how windows should be tiled.
.PP
auto-split
.I boolean
(default: false)
.PP
auto-equalize
.I boolean
(default: false)
.PP
auto-fill-void
.I boolean
(default: true)
.PP
auto-remove
.I boolean
(default: false)
.PP
auto-remove-void
.I boolean
(default: false)
.SS [font]
Set the name of the font used for the window list and notifications.
.PP
name
.I string
(default: Mono)
.SS [border]
Change the style of the window bordes.
.PP
size
.I integer
(default: 0)
.PP
color
.I color
(default: #36454f)
.PP
active-color
.I color
(default: #71797e)
.PP
focus-color
.I color
(default: #c7bb28)
.SS [gaps]
Change the size of the gaps.
.PP
inner
.I quad
(default: 0)
.PP
outer
.I quad
(default: 0)
.SS [notification]
Set the style of the window list and notification windows.
.PP
duration
.I integer
(default: 2)
.PP
padding
.I integer
(default: 6)
.PP
border-size
.I integer
(default: 1)
.PP
border-color
.I color
(default: #000000)
.PP
foreground
.I color
(default: #000000)
.PP
background
.I color
(default: #ffffff)
.SS [mouse]
Add mouse bindings. Mouse bindings have the format:
.I modifiers
+
.I button index actions
.PP
resize-tolerance
.I integer
(default: 8)
.PP
modifiers
.I modifiers
(default: Mod4)
.PP
ignore-modifiers
.I modifiers
(default: Lock+Mod2+Mod3+Mod5)
.SS [keyboard]
Add keyboard bindings. Keyboard bindings have the format:
.I modifiers
+
.I key symbol
or
.I key code actions
.PP
modifiers
.I modifiers
(default: Mod4)
.PP
ignore-modifiers
.I modifiers
(default: Lock+Mod2+Mod3+Mod5)
.
.SH ACTION
.PP
none
    No action at all.
.PP
reload-configuration
    Reload the configuration file.
.PP
assign
.I integer
    Assign a number to a frame.
.PP
focus-frame
.I integer
.B ?
    Focus a frame with given number.
.PP
focus-parent
.I integer
.B ?
    Move the focus to the parent frame.
.PP
focus-child
.I integer
.B ?
    Move the focus to the child frame.
.PP
equalize-frame
    Equalize the size of the child frames within a frame.
.PP
close-window
    Closes the currently active window.
.PP
minimize-window
    Hides the currently active window.
.PP
show-window
.I integer
.B ?
    Show the window with given number or the clicked window.
.PP
focus-window
.I integer
.B ?
    Focus the window with given number or the clicked window.
.PP
initiate-move
    Start moving a window with the mouse.
.PP
initiate-resize
    Start resizing a window with the mouse.
.PP
next-window
.I integer
.B ?
    Go to the next window in the window list.
.PP
previous-window
.I integer
.B ?
    Go to the previous window in the window list.
.PP
remove-frame
    Remove the current frame.
.PP
toggle-tiling
    Changes a non tiling window to a tiling window and vise versa.
.PP
toggle-fullscreen
    Toggles the fullscreen state of the currently focused window.
.PP
toggle-focus
    Change the focus from tiling to non tiling or vise versa.
.PP
split-horizontally
    Split the current frame horizontally.
.PP
split-vertically
    Split the current frame vertically.
.PP
hint-split-horizontally
    Hint that the current frame should split horizontally.
.PP
hint-split-vertically
    Hint that the current frame should split vertically.
.PP
focus-up
    Move the focus to the above frame.
.PP
focus-left
    Move the focus to the left frame.
.PP
focus-right
    Move the focus to the right frame.
.PP
focus-down
    Move the focus to the frame below.
.PP
exchange-up
    Exchange the current frame with the above one.
.PP
exchange-left
    Exchange the current frame with the left one.
.PP
exchange-right
    Exchange the current frame with the right one.
.PP
exchange-down
    Exchange the current frame with the below one.
.PP
show-window-list
    Show the interactive window list.
.PP
run
.I string
    Run a shell program.
.PP
show-message
.I string
    Show a notification with a string message.
.PP
show-message-run
.I string
    Show a notification with a message extracted from a shell program.
.PP
resize-by
.I quad
    Resize the edges of the current window.
.PP
quit
    Quit fensterchef.
.
.SH EXAMPLE
.SS Default configuration
.EX
.B [general]
overlap-percentage 80

.B [tiling]
auto-remove-void false
auto-fill-void true

.B [font]
name Mono

.B [border]
size 0

.B [gaps]
inner 0
outer 0

.B [notification]
duration 2
padding 6
border-color #000000
border-size 1
foreground #000000
background #ffffff

.B [mouse]
resize-tolerance 8
modifiers Mod4

ignore-modifiers Lock Mod2 Mod3 Mod5
LeftButton initiate-resize
MiddleButton minimize-window
RightButton initiate-move

.B [keyboard]
modifiers Mod4
ignore-modifiers Lock Mod2 Mod3 Mod5

Shift+r reload-configuration
a parent-frame
b child-frame
Shift+a root-frame
q close-window
Minus minimize-window
n next-window
p previous-window
r remove-frame
Shift+Space toggle-tiling
Space toggle-focus
f toggle-fullscreen
v split-horizontally
s split-vertically
k focus-up
h focus-left
l focus-right
j focus-down
Shift+k exchange-up
Shift+h exchange-left
Shift+l exchange-right
Shift+j exchange-down
w show-window-list
Return run [ -n "$TERMINAL" ] && "$TERMINAL" || xterm
.EE
.SS Initial layout
.EX
.B [assignment]
901 1 ; st-256color
902 2 ; st-256color
903 3 ; st-256color

# Use st -n X, this sets the instance name to X
# (a feature of suckless terminal)
.B [startup]
assign 901

split-horizontally
focus-right
assign 902

split-horizontally
focus-right
assign 903

st -n 1
st -n 2
st -n 3
.EE
.SS i3-like tiling
.EX
.B [tiling]
auto-split true
auto-equalize true
auto-fill-void true
auto-remove true

.B [keyboard]
v hint-split-horizontally
s hint-split-vertically
.EE
.SS Start ALL windows as floating besides terminal windows
.EX
.B [assignment]
0 * ; st-256color
0 * ; * ; toggle-tiling ; focus-window
.EE
